These instructions assume OS X 10.4 (or newer). It is
possible to compile on 10.3.9.

Download from Apple (or from the Install DVD) the software 
developers kit, the full Apple X11 environment. You will
also need the compiling support tool Fink and optionally
Fink Commander.

It is necessary to register to download and use the software
developers kit (there is no cost). Install this first.

Follow the instructions on the Apple site to download Apple's X11
or find it on your Install DVD. There are two parts to this: the 
first includes the X11 library, fonts, Xserver etc., the second 
includes the `include` folders and C header files needed to 
compile and link with X11.

Fink is a developement environment for Open source software.
It holds information about several thousand packages and
knows how to download source and then compile open source
software. Fink is used to set up several of the tools, helper
applications and compilers which esp-r uses.

Here is a list of some of the packages which are required and or
which are useful and which fink can acquire and/or build:
  app-defaults (required X11)
  apt (required base) front-end for dpkg
  autoconf (required developer) generates configuration scripts
  automake (required developer) makefile generator
  base-files (required base) fink directory infrastructure
  bzip2 (required base) compression tool/library
  cctools (unsure if required for developer)
  cups-dev (optional printing drivers)
  darwin (required) the kernel
  ddd (useful) debugging environment
  debianutils (required base)
  dlcompat (required base)
  dpkg (required base) the Debian package manager
  enscript (useful) generates postscript version of a text file
  fileutils (required base) 
  fink (required) the fink package manager
  flex (probably required) lexical analyser
  g77 (required) GNU fortran77 compiler
  gawk (useful) GNU edition of Awk processing language
  ghostscript (useful) postscript document creation environment
  glib2 (probably required) library of utility functions
  gzip (required) compression tool
  imagemagick (useful) image capture/conversion/display
  lesstif (optional) implementation of Motif graphic libary
  libPNG (optional) image format library
  libtiff (optional) image format library
  m4 (required) macro language
  nedit (useful) text editor which works well with esp-r files
  pkgconfig (required) manages library compile and linking
  system-xfree86 (required) placeholder for Apple X11
  tar (useful) for archiving and unarchiving esp-r models
  transfig (useful) for handling xfig files (can be generated by results module)
  xfig (useful) vector drawing/graphing tool (can be generated by results module)
  
Note that fink finds all the dependencies of a software package and
grabs what it needs. Most of the items above which are noted as
required will be installed with the initial fink installation.

As with other esp-r computing environments is it recommended
that you create a separate user to build and administer the
esp-r modules. This limits the damage that a `normal` user
has to corrupt the corporate tools and databases and exemplar
models.

By default OS X will place user accounts under the folder Users.
You will need to make a link from the actual location of the
esp-r software to `/usr/esru`. Example, if the esp-r executables
live in /Users/esru/esp-r/bin you would make a link
ln -s /Users/esru /usr/esru

When compiling esp-r use the OS X option in the Install script.
Do not use Fink to compile esp-r, use the esp-r Install script.

Also note that the ESP-r Installer works best with GCC 3.3
and g77.  The gfortran and GCC 4.0 available on OSX are
not quite ready.
