
 
 Installing Cygwin for ESP-r use on a Windows XP computer.
 
                 April 2011 version
 
 1.0 Introduction:
 
 Using ESP-r on a PC requires a compatible operating environment.
 There is, for example a Native Windows version of ESP-r, however
 some production tasks and development tasks are more robust under
 the Cygwin emulation environment on Windows computers. Cygwin 
 provides the necessary display, command shell, and low-level 
 library functions and system calls which ESP-r expects to find
 on a Linux computer, but integrated within the Windows environment.
 
 Cygwin differs from virtualization in that it exists within the
 folder structure of Windows rather than in a virtual computer
 so it naturally sees the Windows file folders and Windows Explorer
 can access the files within the Cygwin environment.  Cygwin allows
 ESP-r to run at almost the same speed as a native version.
 
 The document also discusses how to install ESP-r once Cygwin
 has been setup. There are two options: install from a 
 precompiled distribution downloaded from the
 University of Strathclyde ESRU web site, or install from
 source. 
 
 Setting up cygwin requires several steps and the use of commands 
 which will be familiar to those who have used Unix/Linux. If you
 want to jump into that jungle and get your fingers bitten off
 then you will  not  want to read the sections that follow. You
 would probably also want to skip the information on the Cygwin
 web site at <http://www.cygwin.com>. Cygwin can be used with 
 Windows XP and Vista and there are reports that it works ok
 on Windows 7. 
 
 1.1 Before you download and install cygwin:
 
 Prior to downloading and installing cygwin ensure there is an
 administrative and normal user on your PC or that your user
 account has administrative access. In a shared environment there
 may be IT staff who maintain your computer and so it might be best
 to get them to install Cygwin on the computer. Typically
 the Administrator or IT staff would maintain the cygwin and ESP-r
 applications. If you work as a different user for normal simulation
 tasks then it is harder to corrupt databases and test models.
 
 Hints: ESP-r works much better if user names do not have spaces or 
 unprintable characters. ESP-r also works better if you setup your
 user account to have a home folder like C:\Joe rather than the
 typical C:\Documents and Settings\Joe. 
 
 If the computer is part of a domain then there are additional commands
 needed to create entries in the /etc/passwd file and the /etc/group 
 file.
 
 If you are going to take the entire cygwin environment you will
 need ~4GB of disk space plus space for the downloaded installation
 files. If you restrict Cyginw to packages needed to develop ESP-r 
 then you will need ~2.5GB of disk space. If you take a minimum 
 Cygwin that is sufficient to run ESP-r then you will need ~1.5GB 
 of free space for cygwin. You will need ~300 MB for ESP-r source 
 and 200 MB for the installed ESP-r X11 distribution and a bit more
 if you have both GTK and X11 versions of ESP-r.
 
 The install process tends to present fewer hassles if you do the
 Cygwin install as administrator.
 
 1.2 Installing cygwin from the web:
 
 Point a web browser at <http://www.cygwin.com> and click on the "install
 cygwin" icon. This will download a small setup.exe application (c:\TEMP
 is a good place to put it) which will be used to download and install
 cygwin components. This same tool can also be used to update cygwin.
 These instructions are based on the 2.738 version of the setup.exe.
 
 Once downloaded run the setup.exe and it will ask the following
 questions:
   a) Where to get cygwin? Choose the option "internet" if this if
      you have a fast connection and will be installing cygwin on
      one machine. Choose the "download" option if you want to install
      cygwin on more than one machine. Choose the "Install from local
      directory" if you have already downloaded a cygwin distribution
      or are doing it from a CD.
 
   b) Where to put it? Take the suggestion c:\cygwin and also
      the default option "all users" and "Unix file type".
      When asked about a "local package directory accept
      "c:\TEMP" if internet or download, or point to a folder
      with previously downloaded files if that is the approach
      you are taking.
  
   c) For an internet or download install you may have to set an
      appropriate proxy (In the University of Strathclyde this is:
      www-cache.strath.ac.uk port 8080)
 
   d) Select a download site. 
 
 Once the ftp site has been reached the next task is to select the
 packages to install. There are essentially three levels depending 
 on how much disk space you want to allocate to cygwin and ESP-r. 
 
 If disk space is not a problem follow the instructions in section 
 1.3a (essentially you take all of particular software topics).
 If you want cygwin to support compilation of ESP-r then skip section 
 1.3b. If you just want to run ESP-r skip to the section 1.3c.
 
 Consider what type of window manager you would like to use. It is
 possible to replicate the GNOME or KDE window managers found on 
 Linux computers if you have lots of disk space and a fast computer. 
 There is also a minimal approach that allows for ESP-r to run
 in graphic mode without a window manager e.g. it just pops-up on
 the normal screen as an application.
 
 1.3a If disk space is not a problem -  
 
 Select all by toggling the "All -> default" to "All -> Install" for
 the main topics (you might leave at default Audio, Games, Python,
 Science, Security if these are not of interest). This
 could take a few moments for this change to take affect.  It can
 take 30 minutes to download All and another hour to install.
 
 1.3b Packages for ESP-r development - 
 
 If you want to be selective and only download what is required
 to compile and run ESP-r (and save download time and disk space)
 the following is a useful guide. For topics where not all packages
 are needed it may be easier to begin with "default" and manually
 add packages than to start with "Install" and remove packages.
 
  Accessibulity optional
  Admin:        tick all (i.e. toggle Install)
  Archive:      default plus p7zip zip unzip
  Audio:        default
  Base:         tick all (i.e. toggle Install)
  Audio:        default
  Database:     default
  Devel:        if you have space toggle to Install
		        you will want the gcc4 versions of gcc g++ and gfortran
		  
                default plus binutils, DDD, expat, file, gcc tools, gcc,
                gcc4-core, gcc4-fortran 
                gcc4-g++, gcc4-java (optional),  gccmakedep, gdb,gdk-pixbus2,
                gtk2-x11, gendef, gettext, gettext-devel, imake, make, libXaw3d,
                libgcc1, libgfortran3, libiconv, libicu, libjepg libncurses,
                libpng14, libstdc++6, libtool, libxml2, makedepend,
                openssl-dev, patch;utils, pkg-config, readline, splint,
                subversion, subversion-tools, swig (optional), xorg stuff.

  Doc:          default plus the man pages and xpdf
  Editors:      default plus nano, nedit, vim
  Games:        optional
  Gnome:        optional if all you want is an X11 version of ESP-r
                otherwise - add the runtime and development versions of
		        atk, gdk-pixbuf, glib2, gtk2-engines, gtk2-engines-pixmap,
		        libgdk (related), libglib2 (related), libgtk2 (related),
		        librsvg2 (related), libxslt, libxml2, pango
		 
  Graphics:     default plus ImageMagic, ghostscript, jpeg, libpng,
                opengl,tiff and image libraries
  Intepretors:  tick expect, gawk, m4, perl 
  KDE:          optional
  Libs:         tick all except guile and tetext
  Mail:         optional
  Math:         optional
  MinGW:        default
  Net:          tick openssh, ping, inetutils, rsync.
  Perl:         default
  Publishing:   default plus psutils
  Python:       optional
  Science:      optional
  Security:     optional
  Shells:       default plus tcsh, zsh, xterm
  System:       tick all (i.e. toggle Install) 
  Text:         default plus enscript, groff, gv,less, more, textinfo
                or tick all (i.e. toggle Install) 
  Utils:        default plus bzip2, clear, cygutils, file, gnupg, keychain,
                ncurses, patch, time, units, util-linux
  Web:          default plus wget, wdiff, cadaver, neon
  X11:          typically toggle to Install and then try removing most
                of the 100dpi fonts and the Qt items
		
 
 1.3c Packages needed just to run ESP-r:
 
 If you want to be selective and only download what is required
 to RUN ESP-r (and save even more download time and disk space)
 the following is a useful guide:
 
  Admin:        tick all (i.e. toggle Install)
  Archive:      default plus p7zip zip unzip
  Audio:        default
  Base:         tick all (i.e. toggle Install)
  Database:     default
  Devel:        default plus binutils, expat, file, gcc tools, gcc,
                gcc4-core, gcc4-fortran, gcc4-g++, gdb, gdk-pixbus2,
                gtk2-x11, gendef, gettext, imake, make, libXaw3d,
                libgcc1, libgfortran3, libiconv, libicu, 
                libpng14, libstdc++6, libtool, libxml2, makedepend,
                openssl-dev, patch-utils, pkg-config, xorg stuff.
  Doc:          default plus xpdf
  Editors:      default plus nano, nedit, vim
  Games:        optional
  Gnome:        default if all you want is an X11 version of ESP-r
                otherwise - add the runtime versions of
		        atk, gdk-pixbuf, glib2, gtk2-x11-engines, libgnome2,
		        libxslt, libxml2, pango
  Graphics:     default plus ImageMagic
  Intepretors:  default plus gawk and expect 
  KDE:          optional
  Libs:         default
  Mail:         default
  Math:         default
  MinGW:        default
  Net:          default
  Perl:         default
  Publishing:   default
  Python:       optional
  Science:      optional
  Security:     optional
  Shells:       Install
  System:       Install
  Text:         default plus enscript, less, more, textinfo
                or tick all (i.e. toggle Install) 
  Utils:        default
  Web:          default plus wget
  X11:          use the minimal install list (from above).
 
 
 1.4 Post-install patches:
                 
 After completing the list the installer will download the various
 packages. A dependency check is made and if additional libraries 
 or packages are required is it probably best to agree to install 
 them. The installer takes some time sorting out the post-install 
 so do not give up (it may look like no progress is being made)! 
 
 The first time you startup Cygwin a text based command terminal
 will start up. You should notice that standard .bashrc, .bash_profile,
 and .inputrc and .profile files will be copied into your home
 folder (within the Cygwin environment this would be /home/fred
 for a user named fred).  In particular the initial .bash_profile
 includes in the PATH the folder /home/fred/bin if it exists and
 the # are removed from the .bash_profile where the PATH is set.
 
 So on of your first tasks is to create a local bin folder:
   cd
   mkdir bin
 
 Working with graphic tools and windows within Cygwin. On the same
 web page as the setup.exe look for Cygwin/X and the users guide
 for Cygwin/X. There are lots of choices from the minimal approach
 which is based on an application called startxwin that is invoked
 from the Cygwin command shell. Startxwin retains the initial Cygwin
 command window for text applications and starts a single graphic
 X11 terminal for graphic applications such as ESP-r. If you need
 more graphic application running you can also invoke additional
 X11 terminals via issuing an "xterm &" command within the X11
 terminal. This takes the least space and computational
 resources.
 
 An alternative approach is to use XWin -multiwindow which will
 start an X server (look for the icon on the bottom task bar
 and a right-click can be used to start an X11 terminal. There is
 also an experimental XWin -mwextwm
 
 Once Cygwin is installed you can move on to the 2nd stage of 
 installing ESP-r.
 
 After login into the PC as Administrator (suggested), click on the Cygwin 
 icon on your desktop to start up a cygwin window. This emulates a Linux
 machine within your PC. Use Linux commands to go to
 the /tmp folder or create such a folder if it does not
 exist.

 
 Pick either section 1.5a, 1.5b, 1.5c depending on where you
 got the ESP-r distribution.
 
 1.5 Installing ESP-r by downloading a precompiled version
 
 If downloading from the ESRU web site download page at
 http://www.strath.ac.uk/esru. Go to the software -> ESP-r and look
 for downloads and the Cygwin section. Download the installer file
 ending in .run or .exe as well as any readme files. If it is a .run
 file put that in the/tmp folder of your Cygwin environment. If it
 is an .exe file then any location on the C: drive is ok.

 Read the readme file(s) and then (typically as Administrator) 
 run the installer script (the file ends with .run within the Cygwin
 environment). For the .exe installer simply double click on it
 within Windows. The installers will guide you through the rest of 
 the install process.  No compilation is necessary because a complete
 executable distribution for ESP-r is included.
 
 When the script is complete, go to section 1.7.
   
 1.6 Compile instructions:
 
 Once Cygwin is installed you need to alter several files so that
 cygwin starts with an appropriate PATH environment variable. This
 process is similar to that for installing from a precompiled version
 but without using the self-extracting installer.
  
 Standard cygwin will install a gfortran compiler in /usr/bin/
 If you issue the command which gfortran you should get /usr/bin/gfortran.exe
 and /usr/bin/gfortran-4.exe.  You will also need matching gcc
 and g++ compilers.  If these may be listed as g++-4.exe and gcc-4.exe.
 If this is the case then your subsequent use of the ESP-r Install
 script will need to include the directive --compiler_version -4
 in order to ensure that all of the compilers are found.
 
 Issue the command "logout" or "exit" in the Cygwin command
 window and then click on the cygwin icon on the desktop
 to re-establish the PATH environment variable and get an initial
 cygwin command shell window. 
 
 Create a source folder for the esp-r distribution. A typical
 location would be <home_folder>/Src/cvsdude. ESP-r source code is
 now available via a subversion server (source code control). The
 following set of commands is a typical sequence:
   cd
   mkdir Src
   cd Src
   mkdir cvsdude
   cd cvsdude
   svn checkhout https://espr.svn.cvsdude.com/esp-r/branches/development_branch

 Instructions for its use can be found on the ESP-r web page
 <http://www.esru.strath.ac.uk/Programs/ESP-r.htm> as well as
 the Developers Guide on the ESP-r download page.  If we want to
 compile and install ESP-r to its typical Cygwin location then
 the following command sequence will create the folder and then
 invoke the compile process:
   cd
   mkdir /usr/esru
   cd
   cd Src/cvsdude/development_branch/src
   ./Install -d /usr/esru --gcc4 --reuse_ish_calcs

 and if you want to find out what the install options are

   ./Install --help
 
 
 Install, when run as above will use the gcc4 compilers and will proceed
 much as it does under Solaris or Linux or OS X. You will be asked which
 compiler [gcc] and whether you want the X11 or GTK version of the interface
 [first time try X11 as it has fewer dependencies]. You will probably
 want to install training files [say yes] and databases [say yes], and 
 to keep debug symbols [say yes] and to create folders within /usr/esru
 [say yes].

 
 If you want to be able to switch between the X11 and GTK versions of
 ESP-r then after compiling the X11 version create a folder for this
 as follows:
   cd /usr/esru/esp-r
   mkdir bin_X11
   cd bin
   cp * ../bin_X11
   
 Then clean up the object files and re-compile (requesting the GTK
 interface). Once that is done create a folder for the GTK versions:
 
   cd
   cd Src/cvsdude/development_branch/src
   make clean
   ./Install  ......
   (but this time there is no need for the databases and exemplar models
   because they already exit)
   
   cd /usr/esru/esp-r
   mkdir bin_GTK
   cd bin
   cp * ../bin_GTK
   
 Next locate the link_to script and place it is your home bin folder
 and run it to point at the bin_X11 or bin_GTK folder:
 
 cd
 cd bin
 ./link_to /usr/esru/esp-r/bin_X11
 
 If you have modified the .bash_profile file so that the local bin folder
 is first in your path then the X11 version of the executable will be
 the version used.  To switch to the GTK version re-run the link_to
 script with the bin_GTK.
 
 
 1.7 After ESP-r install:
 
 Typically users will start up an X display desktop and work within
 that. There are two general types of X display desktop. The first
 approach creates begins with the initial cygwin text console in which
 the command  startxwin is used to start up a graphic (X11) terminal 
 from which graphic applications such as ESP-r can be run.  

 If you install via the .run file or .exe as one user and then later
 try to use ESP-r as a different user you may find that the graphic
 terminal does not start correctly because of some hidden lock
 files in /tmp/.X11 or because the X11 log file in /var/log cannot be 
 written. If this happens try removing these files (as Administrator).

 It may also be possible to run Cygwin in a virtual screen. See the
 Cygwin documentation for setting this up. It typically requires that
 you have installed some form of window manager (the most basic is twm).

 
 1.8 Radiance install:
 
 The precompiled ESP-r distributions no longer include a precompiled
 Radiance version 3.5 as part of the normal install process.
 
 It is possible to compile Radiance in the cygwin 
 environment. Note that the tiff related modules tend not to 
 compile, but none of these is essential for use with ESP-r. 
 Out-of-the-box (e.g. a fresh download of the standard
 Radiance distribution may lack the gendaylit application.
 
 
